A region is generally defined as an area that can be understood geographically, historically, linguistically and polilically. Different regions may have different cultural practices such as religion, ritual, customs, and traditions. Even when dialect differ from one place to another, there is usually a common language that connects the people of a region.
In Kerala, Malayalam is the dominant language. It connects people who speak different dialects including those living in forest areas. Because Malayalam serves as a common language. It creates a sense of unity among  the pople of Kerala. Therefor Kerala can be considered a region based on it's linguistic identity. It is also a pollically constituted stats with clearly defined boundaries. In this sense, Kerala is a pathetically defined and linguistically  unified region.
Geographically , Kerala has an unique physical features  such as hills, plains, forest backwaters and non-coastal regions. These natural features give Kerala a distinct geographical identity.
Historically and Linguistically, this region was known as "Malayalam" which means the land between the hills and sea meet. The word is formed from 'mala' (hill) and alam (sea). Another term is 'Cheralam', means the land where the hills and sea meets. The name "keralam" is believed to have originated from 'Cherlam'.
Many people wrongly think that the name 'Kerala' comes from a Sanskrit word 'Nalikera', although coconut became a major crop in kerala. It has been widely cultimated only during the last 700 years.
The name Kerala existed much earlier
 and is found in the Ashokan elites of the third century B.C.